#Geography
#Case_Studies

# Pro-natalist policies in Russia
Russia has had low fertility for a number of decades. The reasons include poor reproductive health care services, a relative lack of modern contraceptives, widespread and unsafe abortions, high divorce rates, an ageing population structure, infertility and women choosing to have fewer children. The Soviet Union and the Russian Federation have a long history of pro-natalist policies, starting in 1936, when families were rewarded for having a third or fourth child, and then later for having two children. The government also imposed a tax on childlessness, from 1941 to 1990.

In the 1970s, fertility rates were slightly below replacement level, which led to renewed pro- natalist policies in 1981. However, analysis of the 1981 policy suggests that it reduced the childbearing age rather than increasing the number of children born. By 2006, fertility had dropped to less than 1.3 births per woman, and President Putin announced further measures to increase the birth rate. These included:
- an increase in pregnancy, birth and child benets according to the number of children a family had
- increased parental leave following the birth of a child
- increased payments to mothers of second and third children (which was up to $12,500 in 2012).

The government was also considering a tax on childlessness. These measures had a positive impact. Between 2006 and 2011, fertility increased by 21 per cent. The increase in second births was 40 per cent and in third children 60 per cent. However, these increases were from a very low starting point, and were even less successful than the 1981 reforms. Further analysis of the results suggests that the effects of the policies wore off year by year. After ve years of the policy, women’s intentions to have another child had hardly changed. As they had under the 1981 policy, families had children earlier but did not have signicantly more. In May 2012, President Putin announced that he wanted Russia to have a TFR of 1.75 by 2018. Demographers (people who study population trends) believe that Russia will have to double the state’s nancial support if this is to have any chance of success. Others believe that Russia will need to increase the immigrant population if it is to increase the fertility rate, but some two-thirds of Russians want the number of immigrants reduced, not increased. Russia’s population decline is therefore likely to continue. TFR is likely to remain at less than 1.7 (that is, below replacement level) for the next 20 years. As the population continues to age, the number of people entering childbearing age is likely to be 20 per cent less than those currently of childbearing age. It is possible that Russia’s population in 2100 will be similar to what it was in 1950: 100 million. Not only are there problems with a low birth rate, but there are also problems with a high death rate, partly as a result of smoking, alcohol consumption and obesity. As the population ages, the workforce is predicted to decline by about 15 per cent by 2024. This could be reduced by increasing the retirement age – currently 60 years for men and 55 years for women.